🔹 Git Interview Questions & Answers (with Examples)
1. What is the difference between Git and GitHub?

Git: Local version control tool → installed on system.

GitHub: Cloud hosting platform for Git repositories.

👉 Example:
You can use Git even without internet, but GitHub is needed for team collaboration.

2. Explain the Git workflow.

Working Directory → modify files.

Staging Area → git add stores changes temporarily.

Local Repository → git commit saves permanently.

Remote Repository → git push sends changes to GitHub.

👉 Example:
Write code → git add . → git commit -m "msg" → git push origin main.

3. What is the difference between git pull and git fetch?

git fetch → Downloads changes from remote but doesn’t merge.

git pull → Fetch + Merge changes automatically.

👉 Real-time:
If you want to first review changes before merging, use fetch.

4. What are branches in Git?

A branch is a copy of the code where you can work independently.

main is stable, while features are developed in separate branches.

👉 Example:

git checkout -b feature-login


Now you can work on login feature without affecting main.

5. How do you resolve merge conflicts?

A merge conflict happens when two people edit the same part of a file.
Steps:

Git marks conflict with <<<<<<<, =======, >>>>>>>.

Manually edit file to keep correct version.

Stage and commit again.

👉 Real-time:
Two developers changed config.yaml in different ways → conflict → resolve → commit.

6. What is .gitignore?

File that tells Git which files NOT to track.

👉 Example .gitignore:

node_modules/
.env
*.log


This avoids pushing unnecessary or sensitive files.

7. What is Git stash?

Stash is used to temporarily save uncommitted changes.

👉 Example:

git stash      # Save work
git checkout main
git pull
git checkout feature
git stash pop  # Restore work


Useful when switching branches in middle of work.

8. Difference between git reset, git revert, and git checkout?

git reset → Undo commits (history changes).

git revert → Creates new commit that undoes changes (safe in team).

git checkout → Switch branches or restore files.

👉 Real-time:

If commit is wrong → use revert in team (keeps history).

If working alone → reset is fine.

9. What is the difference between merge and rebase?

Merge: Combines branches with a new commit. Keeps history.

Rebase: Moves branch on top of another. Makes history linear.

👉 Example:

Merge → Better for teamwork (history preserved).

Rebase → Cleaner history (used in solo projects).

10. What is a detached HEAD in Git?

HEAD → pointer to current branch.

Detached HEAD happens when you checkout a commit instead of a branch.

👉 Example:

git checkout abc123   # commit ID


Now HEAD is detached → not on any branch.

11. What is a Pull Request (PR)?

A request to merge your branch into main (done on GitHub/GitLab).

Allows code review, testing, and approval before merging.

👉 Example:
You push feature-api → create PR → team reviews → merge into main.

12. What is the difference between git clone and git fork?

Clone → Copy repo to local.

Fork → Copy repo into your GitHub account (used in open source).

13. How do you squash commits?

Squashing = Combine multiple commits into one.

git rebase -i HEAD~3


Choose squash → creates single commit.

👉 Example:
3 commits like "typo fix", "small update", "final fix" → squash into "Fixed login bug".

14. What is git cherry-pick?

Apply a specific commit from one branch into another.

👉 Example:

git cherry-pick abc123


Useful if only 1 commit needs to be applied instead of full branch.

15. How do you check difference between commits?
git diff commit1 commit2


Shows line-by-line changes between two commits.